Today we have three speakers, Trey Ideker, Trevor Graham, and then I will speak
last. I have no financial relationships to disclose.
I wanted to set up this session with this observation that most
deaths from cancer are caused by the evolution of therapeutic resistance.
So typically, when a patient presents at a clinic, they have
a large degree of heterogeneity, both genetic, epigenetic, and
phenotypic. We apply any kind of therapy.
We typically get some response, killing the sensitive cells, leaving
behind resistant cells, which regrow like a phoenix from the flames
and kill our patients.
This is, I think, the central problem in oncology.
And I wanted to show you a little bit about the level of
evolvability of cancers. We collected up these
estimates of the different parameters of the evolvability of cancer from the
literature. Point mutation rates are 10 to the negative 9 to 10 to the negative
10 per base pair per cell division.
That's not in mismatch repair deficient cells.
That would go up by a couple orders of magnitude.
The amplification and deletion rate is somewhere on the order of 10 to the negative
4 per gene per cell division, and given that there's about 10 to the 4 genes,
that means that one gene is having a copy number alteration and about
at least one
point in the genome is mutating every cell division across
the billions to trillions of cells in a tumor.
And you put these things together, and approximately every base pair in the genome
is going to be mutating every cell generation, and every gene is going to
be changing by deletion and amplification many times
over somewhere in the tumor every cell generation.
So if there is a mechanism of resistance, cancers will find it, often
before therapy is even applied.
So that's the challenge here. We're dealing with extremely
evolvable disease, and the question of this session
really is how can we manage an evolving disease?
So I'm going to actually ask Trey Ideker
to start off our session,
and we'll go from there. Trey.
Well, great. Thanks very much, Carlo, for the great invitation to represent our
work in this session on tumor evolution.
And I'm going to talk about a slightly different topic than I put in the program,
related to some late-breaking work from a very talented postdoc in the
group, Jungho Kang,
on a foundation model of the tumor genome, which having built
that, starts to shed light not only on drug resistance but also tumor
evolution. And just first, the required disclosures.
I'm a co-founder of two companies, Data 4 Cure and Serenus
Biosciences, and on the advisory boards of Adaya Biosciences
and Icon Therapeutics. Nothing I'm talking about today is related to those
companies. It is highly related, however, to our grant support, most
recently starting from the NCI's generous support over
almost a 10-year period on our Systems Biology Center,
and now being taken forward by this nascent
ARPA-H ADAPT Precision Oncology program that
launched just about a year ago, a little less than that.
So, we all know that tumors evolve at different
layers of information, and I think we also all know that one
of those important layers of information is the tumor genome itself
and somatic mutations that arise in different cell
populations over the course of life.
And I thought I would just start the talk with an anecdote to illustrate,
from some recent work in our lab in collaboration with Rich White at University of
Oxford, really that concept in action.
So what we reported in this paper about a year ago,
and in particular Mayen in my lab working with Mojita in Rich's lab,
they found that mutation of this 12 to 15
subunit complex known as the desmosome, which forms cell-cell
junctions,
is mutated in nearly all or at least the vast majority
of melanomas or melanoma biopsies.
And what Mojita goes on to show in this work
is a couple of striking things about the evolution of these things.
So first of all, melanocytes themselves don't
express desmosomes. The primary tissue or
tumor does not express that organelle.
Where the mutations are arising are almost certainly in the
stroma, in particular in neighboring keratinocytes
through which the primary melanocytes expand during tumor
evolution.
And so that was the first finding, is that you have these
early potentiating events in the stroma,
and so we have to think about evolution as not just a single cell population
or even a single cell type, but as an ecosystem
of cells evolving together where a mutation in one
cell type can give rise and potentiate to tumors in another cell
type or to tumorigenic potential.
The other interesting point here, or generalizable
principle, is that the mutations aren't to a single gene or
even to a single point
in this circuit. You really need knowledge of this network down here
of 12 to 15 subunits, and the mutation burden that
can arise to potentiate melanoma can be in any
number. You're essentially knitting together rare
events whose burden is spread across these 12 to 15
subunits, as you can see here. All of the red genes in
this waterfall plot, reverse ranked by gene mutation
frequency, those are all desmosomal components.
And so although some are more frequently mutated than others, like DSP,
the DSP component, they're all mutated in different patient
samples. So knowledge of the desmosome structure
itself was really what was required to make these
insights.So that's an anecdote, and it got us
thinking a lot at that point about how can we
generalize
those kinds of discoveries into a broader
system.
How many more desmosomes are there out there, and how many more
insights from the tumor genome have not yet been gleaned?
And I think that's a pretty broad question.
I think we all know we're still far from extracting full information from the tumor
genome. But it is worth
sort of stating where we are. So certainly,
as a data modality, the
tumor genome, or at least 500 plus gene panels, are about
as abundant as any data type. Maybe EHR and
histopathology would compete with that.
But it's certainly an abundant data type, okay, as you'll see in a second,
both from basic and clinical research.
But of course, we're still faced with how do we make sense of that
complex mutation profile, and ultimately, what are
complete ways? How do we extract complete knowledge out of that?
As a bellwether for why we haven't
yet made enough progress is currently, even with the 500 plus
gene panels, clinically, you're able to match a
patient to a targeted therapy in only about 8% of cases.
And usually, it's not from looking at any kind of gene circuit or combination,
but from just a single actionable gene on that panel.
Now, of course, you could always say, well, the information simply isn't there.
But assuming
more information is there,
there's a couple of reasons why it might not have been extracted so
far. One, and we've seen these already in that example.
Cancer mutations consist of a few well-known,
frequently mutated players and a vast sea of rare
events, okay, making
analysis of the tumor genome difficult. That's point one.
Point two is these rare events, though, can combine in
larger circuits and molecular machinery to give rise
to cancer and drug responses of that cancer.
So events typically are rare, and they're often
combinatorial in nature,
both of which add complexity to the tumor genome problem.
So I don't know how many people went to this AI session this morning.
But there's a lot of rapid advances
happening in the machine learning field, and one advance that you've now
heard-- two, three years ago, you would not have heard the word foundation model at
this conference or really any conference.
Now, I'm guessing everyone's heard it at least several times, and you're going to
hear it again from Jung Ho and me.
Because we were thinking about the tumor genome, and it occurred to us
that a foundation model, or that is to say, a self-supervised
machine learning framework, might be the way to make
progress given all the challenges described in the upper bullet
points on this slide. And I'm going to show that in the rest of my
talk. So the idea of self-supervised or
foundation modeling is you start where the data are prolific.
Tumor genomics is the perfect example of that.
Without any other outcomes information, you don't try
to link right away to messy outcomes where you have fewer,
lower quality, potentially less well annotated, I should say,
data. We simply, in a
self-reflective, referential way,
use the tumor genome to predict back itself.
And in so doing, we develop a so-called embedding or
foundational representation of that tumor, and if you've
ever seen a UMAP, that is a foundation or that's an embedding of a data set,
of a cell type or of a data set. Here we're going to embed tumors
in some low-dimensional space using this
foundation self-supervised approach. So here's how it works.
And this, I should say, Jung Ho worked very productively with another
post-doc at UCSD, Xin Wang,
who's now a senior scientist there.
So first they gathered the data, and here, it's fitting this is an AACR conference
because the AACR Project Genie was absolutely
indispensable to this exercise. Right away, just
covering 10 solid tumors, and we started here, you've heard about
this ARPA-ADAPT program. They really have a big focus on breast,
lung, and colorectal cancers. So we went after those first and
then added other solid tumors to get up to 30,000
tumors where we have the Project Genie
468 gene panel. In some cases you have larger numbers of
genes, but 468 was where we started, and it turns out this number is actually
much, much greater as you expand the number of tumor types beyond
a focus on just those. Now, how does the self-supervised learning
exercise work here? Well, so what we do is we
mask a particular gene, and we're looking, by the way, at somatic point
mutations, copy number amplifications, and deletions.
So those are the three rows in the schematic down here.
And now, over those
just under 500 genes, you have some mutation pattern in a given tumor.
You mask out one of those genes or several of those genes, and you
try to get a
predictive model, a machine learning model, to predict them back.
And this is exactly or very similar to how large language models
work in terms of word completion. Those models, as well
as your human brains, as I speak, are
predicting the next phrase, okay, all the
time. Here you're predicting the next gene mutation
state.So
here's what the architecture of that looks like in a little more detail.
The input genome is shown over left.
You'll see in addition to the genome itself, we put in some covariates
like tumor mutation burden, aneuploidy, and mutational
signatures. The output, as I've already described, is a masked gene
state that you're trying to predict back from the input of all the other genes.
And the one detail I want to add here in this architecture, you can kind of gloss
over a lot of it, it's fairly standard for this kind of thing.
But, we have put in here a graph attention layer,
where we can feed in prior knowledge about how genes connect to other
genes in multiple kinds of pathways and networks.
And so we've put in here physical protein-protein interaction knowledge,
knowledge of transcription factor promoter binding, knowledge of kinase
substrate phosphorylation, ubiquitination interactions,
synthetic lethal genetic interactions, and so on.
So this is sort of prior
knowledge networks that are going to help this thing learn combinations
insofar as those networks are useful.
And as you'll see, sometimes it uses them, sometimes it doesn't need to.
Okay. So first, let's just look at what that...
Oh, and I should say, going back,
having done this, you now are very interested in this penultimate layer
here. This is the low dimensional representation of the
tumor. You have a bunch of neurons at the output that you're going to now use
to... And that's your tumor foundational embedding.
Okay? And so we then show that in two dimensions, of course, we use slightly
more dimensions for the embedding, but you then project that into two.
And so the first thing that it's nice to see is that you've organized
tumors, having done this exercise
by their tumor type.
And that's because, of course, as we all know, different tumor types have
different characteristic mutation patterns writ large. Okay?
But the question was, within any given tumor type, factoring that
aside, what do we see is really driving that
embedding? And you see, as I mentioned, single gene
alterations,
really where the model's giving attention, and also
pairwise combinations. And so an example, taking bladder
cancer samples, if you look up here, that's bladder cancer.
You can look underneath the model and interpret it, and you see that this
RB1 TP53 combination is really important for the
dual mutation state of those two genes.
FGFR3,
CDK2A,
that combination is also very important for that model's position
there. But it's not just these few top interactions.
If you look at the model's attention overall, it's giving
attention as it positions your tumor, a tumor into space, to
thousands of such combinations.
Okay, so now that's, more I could say there,
but in a short talk, I'll keep moving, and now illustrate use
of those coordinates that
MutationProjector has now determined for a tumor to
make supervised predictions of drug responses.
Okay? And the idea here again is we've used 30,000
plus tumors, and if you think about it, each times
500 genes, so that's 150 million training data
points, right? So you've done a lot of training, and
now you turn to drug response data sets where you're lucky to
have a few hundred tumors and tumor responses, but you've
benefited now from this prior pre-training phase.
And so what we've done here is, and we've tried to
be very hygienic about things, so we
keep the data used for training entirely separate from the
data I'm going to show you for
testing. And we went after two main tasks as
many people are interested in doing prediction of immunotherapy,
drug responses, and prediction of chemotherapy drug
responses.
Shout out to the tech guys for getting this slide in. Thank you very much.
Wasn't sure I was going to see this slide, and I have.
So here is the
results. In the interest of time, just going to focus on the
immunotherapy drug prediction challenge in
lung cancer and that test cohort. And so
here's what that, if you then use the model in a separate
downstream supervised random forest, again, the
inputs to mutation or the input to the second model... Let me just go back.
The input to the second model are now the MutationProjector
embedding coordinates. You then use a random forest to predict,
is this patient going to respond or not to immunotherapy?
And here is what that validation performance looks like.
And then you can, of course, benchmark this against a huge, you'd like to be very
comprehensive, in
what you compare in terms of benchmarking against and,
just to give you sort of the top of that list, we've compared against alternative
architectures as well as sort of more
classical biomarkers of immunotherapy.
But what I really want to get to is model interpretation now.
So if you now look at what are the genomic
patterns that are giving rise to that predicted response or non-response,
that's shown over here in this OncoPrint.
So you do have single gene mutation patterns
that are enriched in responders versus non-responders.
For instance, NF1, 30% mutated in
responders, only 9% in non-responders.
However, where a lot of the action is, it gets back to these
mutation combinations. So it was already well known
or known at least that a KEAP1
STK11 dual mutation, dual event,
could cause resistance. But it turns out that STK11 can also
combine with KRAS and SMARCA4 and some other factors
in these networks. And so if you look, interestingly enough, if you look
at either one, any of these genes individually,
STK11, it's slightly elevated in
non-responders. KRAS is around the same.
KEAP1, again, the slight pattern, but the real striking difference
is in the co-mutation and that feature
space.Okay. So,
now
that's prediction of drug response.
I want to get back to this issue of tumor evolution.
So it's interesting to note that in the Project Genie
training data, it's primarily metastatic, but you also have a
healthy number of...
It's primarily primary, but you also have a healthy number of
metastatic cases in there, enough for it to do a lot of learning.
I think it's about a two-third to one-third ratio.
And so, we then began to explore,
again, not in the original training data, but in validation data sets,
where we had tumors that had been sequenced multiple times in the
patient at the primary tumor biopsy, and then at sometimes
multiple metastases during progression of the
disease. And we started to then look at what that embedding space
looks like in the mutation projector model.
So if you look at stage one tumors, and here's where these data are taken
from. There's the citation on the lower right, so not the training data.
This is where
stage one tumors end up in that embedding.
And you can see, as the tumor clinical stage progression
goes forth from stage one to two, three to four,
this is now looking at the primary site and the metastatic site in those stage four
patients. You can see a gradual movement towards the
east.
Okay?
You also see some points that might,
in the stage one, that are already
quite far east, right? Perhaps alluding to their
metastatic potential at an early stage. Okay?
And you can also do this for individuals, and so here's three
individuals that went into that analysis, just to show you what's
going on. So here's a lung tumor that was then caught at the lymph nodes and
resequenced. Here's a lung tumor that was caught in the liver and resequenced.
Here's a lung tumor that was caught in the CNS and resequenced in three different
sites. Okay, so you're seeing that now
all these are lung adenocarcinomas, so we're factoring out tumor type, okay,
as you saw. That's the driving position in this embedding.
But after that,
PC1 is basically pseudo-time,
for lack of a better word, at least in our hands right now.
Of course, it's early days, and happy to discuss whether or not that's an
appropriate interpretation of our data.
Again, one can look at what's pushing tumors to the more
advanced evolutionary stage.
Or what are the evolutionary changes to the genome, I think is the better way
to say it. And so here, again, there's some of that interpretation.
Again, very early days for some of this.
As expected, this is not a novel observation,
P53 mutational frequency goes up as you move to the
right in that foundational embedding.
But then it turns out there's a lot of contributions, not just from P53.
APC doubles in its
percentage,
as does NKX2.
CDKN2A goes from 7 to 16%.
And you can see, since the patients in these oncoprints are across the
columns, each patient is described by a different combination
of some of these events.
So, in summary, what I've really focused on today is a
single project, and it's really driven
by our potential excitement over foundation models and
self-supervised learning as a way to reorient
the tumor genome, both for basic cancer research, but
also for clinical use and utility moving
forward. The idea is,
as we know where we are in the field of cancer
-omics, we have a lot of tumor genomes.
Annotation to clinical outcomes
has always lagged behind. It's getting better. It still lags behind.
So the strategy is, don't look at that right away, just use the tumor
genomes,
make the best foundational representation you can, but that
milks as much information as you can out of the genome, and then use that
coordinate system for multiple downstream and
diverse applications, both in basic research and clinical
application.
And, as a nice byproduct, we think this is also going to
be an interesting embedding to study tumor evolution.
So thank you very much. Happy to take questions.
Hello. I was wondering whether
while training the foundational model, you took into
account the tumor purity of your samples.
Yeah. So actually, Carlo has been asking me about this for the past
two months, at least. Right now, a tumor is a single point in that
space. Okay? What you're implying, I'm just going to sort
of
read into, is that a tumor...
So I have not
answered your question, okay? But I can tell you how it could be answered.
If you had the data, each
clone could now be its own point in that
embedding space, and that's absolutely where this has to go.
Okay.
You seem unsatisfied.
No maybe I wasn't that clear. In terms of,
well, in TCG samples, we know that
we have also infiltration of normal cells and immune
cells.
Oh, I see. So not clonality, you mean purity?
No, no, no, tumor purity.
Right.
Yeah. So the percentage of tumor cells in your
samples
that, I guess, could skew a bit the frequency of
mutations, for example.
Yeah.
We haven't looked at that. What would you expect-Would you
worry that purity is somehow driving one of those PCs?
Well,
for example, in gene expression, it can skew your
differential expression if you have a lot of normal cells-
Right
... in your samples. I know that TCGA samples are quite pure.
Well, and you're calling somatic mutations, but I don't
mean to disregard your point. It's a good point.
But yeah. Short answer is we haven't looked. We could take a look.
Yeah, okay. Yeah. Thanks.
Yeah.
Thank you for your talks. I wonder about
how you are using the previous knowledge in the model.
So can you elaborate more about it?
So,
for example, if the knowledge database is updated,
should you retrain your model?
That's a great point. We've used up-to-date resources, but
at the moment, yes,
as those graphs get updated, you'd have to retrain the
model. There probably is a
method moving forward that would make that more graceful.
Love to talk about it.
Laura Ventere, UCSF. Short question.
Hey.
So your foundational model uses the DNA mutations,
but tumors are influenced by hormones, microbiomes,
whatever else. So the TCGA also has RNA and protein
data.
If you have all that data, I would assume you would all use it,
but would you then always start with mutation? Is that what you're telling us?
No, we're mainly trying to solve this problem that the genome has long
had, which is you have all these rare events which make it very hard
to find associations with outcomes.
And so
the goal is simply, can we make the tumor genome more
actionable? It's not necessarily to say
it should be used instead of any other
omics layer. In fact, just the opposite.
We now see that this foundation model would then be sitting
alongside sister foundation models of the
transcriptome, and for instance, histopathology.
I'm not saying instead.
Yeah.
My question is, if you build the model, would you always start with the
layer of mutations and then add the other?
No. So we've argued about this, and right now,
parallel. We're thinking the right strategy, but again, happy to
discuss this after.
You could imagine moving in series or sequentially.
But
one advantage,
this may not be where biological or clinical truth is, but there is an
advantage to having these as separate models that then get
late-stage integrated in parallel.
And it's simply to keep things modular so that different groups can make progress
on different layers of data, and then you bring it all to bear at the end.
But I'm happy to discuss. Ultimately, I think we have to
try multiple things and then see what works.
Once I give you the data.
Yes.
Hey, Trey. Building on Laura's question, we've seen a lot
of advancements in connecting the genomics with
pathology.
Yeah, totally. And so actually what's behind is-- That's actually really similar to
Laura's question in a way. She cares about-
It's also
... gene expression, of course.
So Jung Ho has actually used
histopathology, I believe, in this model, he's sitting right
there,
in a sequential way,
to help score
parameters related to immunotherapy response.
The immune infiltration, of course, like the TILS, is something
you can extract out of histopathology images.
Of course, there's a lot more you could do there.
And whether it's putting one of these
histopathology embedding models, like you might have heard from
Faisal this morning, alongside this model or in
series or some other idea. Again, I think
we're, at the moment, just focused on the genome and really making that work as
well as we can, and then moving to
how you integrate it.
Building on that, I guess in general, what do you think the limitations are
to this? Is it the amount of data? Is it the type of data?
Well,
so
the limitation of the model I just described is the amount.
It's still data limited, and the way we found that out is Jung Ho has now trained a
model on 270,000 genomes, based on just
expanding what's in ACR Project Genie, and it gets way better.
And so it'll be interesting to see where it plateaus.
But I think the other limitations people have pointed to, actually, we've heard
some interesting ones.
Tumor purity, I think, remains to be seen.
Certainly, clonality needs to be dealt with.
We know the tumor genome doesn't have all the information.
We just want to make the best use of it we can and get the maximal information we
can. So clearly, multimodal is another future.
So those are all either opportunities or limitations, depending on how you want to
write your discussion section.
Great. Thank you-
Thank you
... very much.
Next up, we have Trevor Graham from the Institute of Cancer Research.
Good morning. Thank you for the invitation, Carlo.
It's a pleasure to be here. I want to talk about pre-cancer and how
understanding the evolution of pre-cancer can lead to more effective
ways for early detection and also for cancer
prevention. And I'm specifically going to talk about
the evolution of
colorectal cancers arising in inflammatory bowel disease.
So I have a few disclosures, none of which are directly relevant to this
talk.So first of all, I just want to thank the many people who've
contributed to this work over many years. You see their beautiful faces here.
Particularly like to highlight Elsa Hart, who runs the inflammatory bowel disease,
IBD unit at St Mark's Hospital. St Mark's is the UK's
specialist bowel hospital, and also Kit Curtis, just to her left
in the pictures, who's in the audience today, who's led much of the work that you
will see. And grateful to many funders, particularly
Cancer Research UK.
So for those of you not familiar, inflammatory bowel disease is an extremely common
disease. Something like one in 100 people have it.
So unfortunately, there are probably people in this room suffering from IBD.
It's a tough disease. It's characterized by this severe
inflammation you can see in those images on the right, these endoscopic
images inside the colon. The inflammation is
relapsing and remitting. It damages the mucosa, and we think that
damage and then subsequent healing drives clonal evolution
within the bowel by selecting for cells that can survive the
inflammation and then selecting for cells that have a growth advantage during
the healing phase.
Because inflammation drives clonal evolution, having inflammatory bowel
disease or colitis for short,
significantly increases the risk of colorectal cancer.
So here you see a Kaplan-Meier curve about the probability of getting
colorectal cancer by age in the large surveillance
cohort that they have for people with inflammatory bowel disease at St Mark's.
And you can see that people who live to older ages
whilst keeping their bowel, because the best way to prevent cancer in
inflammatory bowel disease is to remove the bowel.
But people who live to old age whilst having kept their bowel with inflammatory
bowel disease, about one in three of those individuals will develop cancer.
You compare that to the overall population rate of colorectal cancer, which is a
little bit higher than one in 20, and you can see that having IBD,
significantly increases the risk of developing colorectal cancer.
So
why is there this increased risk? What's going on?
Clearly something is going on in the mucosa and I suggested already the
inflammation should select for cells that survive and also for cells that
grow. So we try to measure this and I'm going to show you an image
which is really quite gory, so if anyone's squeamish, please look away.
Here you go. You've all had breakfast I'm sure.
This is a whole colectomy specimen.
This is the way, as I mentioned, to deal with colorectal cancer risk is
patients can have their bowel removed and then they of course cannot get bowel
cancer. This patient did sadly have bowel cancer.
The bowel cancer is here in this kind of lumpy region in the bowel on the
left. What we did is take
biopsies from this resection specimen along the entire bowel
length. So on the right here you see a map of where we collected
these biopsies and if you count the numbers you'll see that we have just over 100
biopsies sampled from this individual colon.
The colors in the map show you the different grades of tissue that were present in
this person's colon and you can see that they have multiple patches of
dysplasia. That's a
morphologically
identifiable, pathologically identifiable
precancerous lesion. But much of the bowel is just inflamed.
It doesn't have any evidence of the pre-cancer there.
So then on each of these biopsies we did multi-omics, and I'm just going to
tell you about the whole genome sequencing that we did on all of these samples
today.
So the gore's gone now if anyone was looking away.
So what you now see is,
on the left you see a heat map showing you the pattern of copy number
alterations. That's the loss and gain of genetic material across the genome.
Each column in that heat map is a different chromosome and where you see color
there's a loss or a gain of chromosomal material.
Warm colors are gains.
And so each row corresponds to one biopsy.
And so you can see the numbers. I'm just showing you the data from this kind of
central column of biopsies that we took around the bowel and
the samples move from the cecum near the small intestine
at the top and as you move down this heat map you move clockwise around the bowel
towards the rectum.
And so what you can see straight away is that in lots of the bowel there is
copy number alteration.
And of course that copy number alteration is there because so much of the
bowel carries it without any morphological change.
So there's massive copy number alteration without
dysplasia and certainly without cancer.
This is perhaps surprising because we're used to the idea now that there are lots
of mutations
in healthy tissues. They accumulate as we age.
But we're not used to the idea that there's chromosomal instability and aneuploidy
in healthy tissues. This is not a healthy tissue but it's not a
cancerous tissue but yet it has burdens of aneuploidy.
Seeing this level of aneuploidy you would think this is a cancer genome but it's
very much not a cancer genome.
Then the other remarkable thing that you see in this data when you look a little
bit harder is if you just kind of track the columns, track the
chromosomes that carry these copy number alterations,
you can quite clearly see that these are clonal expansions.
There's one or two major clones here and those clones have
spread around the entire bowel.
We're seeing there's a clonal expansion.
The expansion of a single cell, something of the order of 10 to the -9 meters
can spread around the entire bowel length, so over the order
of about a meter in length. So we see clonal expansions here
without cancer over nine orders of magnitude and I still just
find this data completely remarkable that we see that going
on. So you can do phylogenetics on the data.
Here I've just
built a phylogenetic tree on a subset of samples where we have good
dataAnd then you can do some Bayesian timing of
when these clones were born. And you can see that this is slow
burn. These clones have been evolving in the bowel for multiple decades,
and this large genome double clone here has probably been in the bowel
for 10 or so years prior to sampling.
So there's this long, protracted evolutionary process that leads to clonal
expansions over huge swathes of the bowel mucosa.
Interestingly, you can ask about the correlation with P53.
People always ask me, "Is this just a P53 mutation thing, and then the
aneuploidy is a consequence of that?" It isn't.
The P53 comes after the aneuploidy in
many of these clones. So something else selects for aneuploidy that isn't
just loss of P53 in these bowels.
Okay, so that's the remarkable biology of pre-cancer in the
inflamed bowel. We have these huge clonal expansions over many years
taking over the bowel. So can we exploit that pre-cancer evolution to try and
intercept cancers arising in
inflammatory bowel disease?
So at the moment, patients with IBD are offered here in the
US and in most countries in the world, are offered a place on a surveillance
program where they have regular endoscopy to look for early signs of
cancer. And those early signs of cancer are dysplasia.
Dysplasia is a bad biomarker. It's bad for many
reasons. All of these images contain dysplasia, and you can see how
different they look. So it's very hard to see dysplasia endoscopically.
The pathologists also disagree on what is dysplasia, so it's a difficult
thing to pin down. But then you've seen already that there can be huge
burdens of genetic mutations, cells that you would assume are predisposed to
cancer, which do not show dysplastic change.
And so using dysplasia as a biomarker looks very suboptimal, and we ask, well, can
we do better than that?
The other thing about dysplasia detection is that it doesn't actually predict
cancer risk very well at all. So this again is in our St.
Mark's cohort. This is about 1,500 patients in
surveillance. This is a Kaplan-Meier curve from the
time baseline is when a person was diagnosed with a particular
type of lesion, either a low-grade dysplasia, high-grade
dysplasia, or also kind of a sporadic polyp that's thought to arise without being
associated with IBD. And you can see the probability of those people
going on to get cancer in each of the different lines in the Kaplan-Meier.
What I want to draw your attention to is the purple line.
These are people diagnosed with low-grade dysplasia, and only one in
three of those people will go on to develop colorectal
cancer in the future. If someone has low-grade dysplasia, then they may be
recommended to have their bowel removed to prevent that cancer risk.
That recommendation would be wrong for two out of three people.
And so you can see how poor
dysplasia is as a biomarker. Interestingly, high-grade
dysplasia, this is very close to cancer, the pathologist would say is
and considered a really strong indication to have bowel removal
surgery. That's wrong in half of cases.
So you can see that dysplasia really is a poor biomarker of cancer
risk in inflammatory bowel disease.
So can we do better? So over a number of years now, we've run a
series of fairly large case control studies where we take,
in this study, low-grade lesions as entry into the
study,
and we split those lesions into people who subsequently progress to
cancer a number of years after having their low-grade lesion detected and
removed at endoscopy versus low-grade lesions that were resected,
and those people remain cancer-free for a number of years
following removal of their low-grade lesion.
And then what we did, we know that copy numbers, this aneuploidy
is clonally expanded in the bowel.
We asked the question, if we look at the burden of aneuploidy in these
low-grade lesions, we know that what is evolving in the IBD colon, does
that burden of aneuploidy predict future cancer risk?
So we sequenced the initial low-grade lesions, and we asked,
does the pattern of aneuploidy predict subsequent risk to cancer,
subsequent cancer development in this case control study?
And so this is work that Kit led
with the others you can see here.
So this is what the data typically look like.
Here's a low-grade lesion from a non-progressor patient.
Here's one from a progressor patient.
My pathologist friends tell me that there's nothing
particularly different pathologically about these two different lesions.
This is the endoscopic image. Again, they look very similar.
But here's the genome along the bottom.
You can see in this non-progressor, there are a couple of deletions there in the
genome, whereas in this progressor patient, there are a number of copy number
alterations, many events on the smaller chromosomes.
So that pattern is generally true.
These histograms of the frequency of copy number events across the
genome in non-progressors, you see copy number events are quite rare in
non-progressors.
Whereas in progressors, there are frequent losses and gains of
chromosomes, particularly a gain of seven, loss of four and five,
and events on some of the smaller chromosomes.
If you count how many copy number events have happened in these genomes, there's
hugely significantly more events in people who
subsequently progress to cancer.
So this is starting to look like a really good biomarker of cancer risk.
So then if you dichotomize the burden of aneuploidy in
these dysplastic lesions into high or low, people with a low
burden here, the red line, essentially do not go on to get cancer,
whereas those with a high burden, the blue line, are extremely likely to
progress to cancer.
So this was in our discovery data of almost 70 patients and in an independent
validation data set of about 55, we see
equal amazing predictive value.
So the genomics alone is close to 85% positive and
negative predictive value after a few years.
This is really high predictive value.
If you compare it to any other early detection test, I think it knocks it out of
the park, frankly. It's extremely
prognostic.And on the right, if you combine it with
other features that we know are prognostic,
the genomics adds to these other features and significantly
increases their predictive value.
So I just want to show you a few other things about how we might be able to exploit
this. So at the moment, if a dysplastic lesion is detected, there's a
move towards less surgery. So rather than having surgery, someone might
have endoscopic resection of that dysplastic lesion.
But we know that there's this massive field cancerization going on in the bowel,
and so is it safe, we wondered from an evolutionary perspective, to have
this limited removal of only the dysplasia?
So we designed a study led by Jen and Konstantin in the lab, where there's
dysplastic lesions that were endoscopically removed.
We sequenced the lesion, but we also asked what was going on in the normal-looking
margins around the lesion. And we wanted to know
if there was evidence of field cancerization, these aneuploid clones that we know
spread around the bowel, if they were in the margins, did that predict
future risk of getting cancer? In other words, could we see if
it was safe or not to have a limited resection in terms of
cancer risk? And so Jen and
Konstantin collected a number of dysplastic lesions and separately dissected
out the dysplastic region, the normal margins, and sequenced each
spatial region independently.
So here's some of the data. This is a dysplastic lesion from a patient who
subsequently progressed to colorectal cancer in the same bowel
segment.
So the margins here, the M regions, the dysplasia, the
DYS1 and DYS2. Here's the copy number alterations across the
genome in each of those regions and a phylogenetic tree showing the
clonal relationship between the margins and the dysplasia.
You can see that essentially the margins and the dysplasia are completely
clonal. So there's one aneuploid clone here that's present in the
dysplasia and also in the margins.
So here, endoscopic resection leaves the
clone behind.
This is different patient. I'm sorry for the low quality of the image here, but
here the aneuploidy is limited to only the dysplastic region and the
margin is wild type. This person remained cancer-free
after endoscopic resection of their dysplastic lesion.
So this is generally true. So we've done this in a number of patients now.
This is the burden on the y-axis of copy number alteration of aneuploidy in the
margin of these dysplastic lesions is much, much
higher, extremely statistically significantly higher, despite the relatively small
number of patients that we've sequenced in those who subsequently progressed
to cancer after endoscopic resection.
So we're really interested in this as a way to prevent cancer.
We could have limited resection, and we could look for molecular clearance in the
margins as a way of detecting have we removed these
pre-cancerous clones or not that are subsequently going to go on to
develop cancer in that individual.
So I've shown you focusing on dysplasia, but
I started the talk by telling you that dysplasia was a poor biomarker of
cancer risk in inflammatory bowel disease.
So can we do anything without thinking about dysplasia?
And also very few IBD patients will actually get dysplasia.
Most people remain free of dysplasia and then may get cancer with
no prior diagnosis of dysplasia. So
this need to be able to predict cancer
risk and do early detection applies to
all patients, not only the small subset that have dysplasia.
So to address this, we did another fairly large case control study.
Again, a progressive versus non-progressive design.
But rather than focusing on dysplastic lesions, we focused on the routinely
collected surveillance biopsies that were non-dysplastic.
And again, we took those from progressors and non-progressors, and we sequenced
each biopsy individually using whole genome sequencing, and we
asked, does the pattern of aneuploidy present at baseline
predict future cancer risk? And you won't be surprised to see that it does.
So here's a summary of the data. Again, here the progressors are on
the top. This is a histogram of copy number alterations across the
genome in progressors. You can see that they're much more common in progressors
than they are in non-progressors.
Although there are often copy number alterations that are clonally
expanded enough for us to be able to detect them even in people who don't go on to
get cancer. So the inflamed bowel is a hotbed for selecting
for aneuploidy.
So here's the summary. These violin plots show you the burden of copy number
alterations in progressors versus non-progressors.
You can see the burden is much greater in progressors.
And then here's the Kaplan-Meier curve in this case control study.
And the baseline cancer risk looks very skewed here of course because we've
selected a third of our patients who are progressors in this case control study.
But the red line is the people with a higher burden of aneuploidy
within their biopsies.
We actually measure the clonal diversity between biopsies, but it's very
correlated. Those individuals have a highly
elevated risk of getting colorectal cancer in
the subsequent years following those biopsies.
So aneuploidy is also predictive even in the absence of
dysplasia.
So I've shown you that I think the evolution of
colitis-associated colorectal cancer, colorectal cancer arising in inflammatory
bowel disease is fascinating. There's this protracted
precancerous evolutionary time where clones can spread around the
entire bowel length, and that process happens over a number of years.
I think understanding what drives that biology is going to be
fascinating because it really is remarkable, quite wild biology
that happens in people's bodies.
And then detection of these aneuploid clones, either in dysplasia or in the
normal-looking bowel, I think is an extremely powerful
early detection biomarker. It's powerful enough that we should get it into the
clinic and think about using it to intercept cancers and
prevent unnecessary surgery
and unnecessary endoscopy.So here's
a list of all the many people who've contributed to it.
I highlighted the key people at the start.
Their names are in bold on this slide. Very grateful to the funders.
And just before I go, I'd like to highlight that the American Cancer
Society and Cancer Research UK are running this cancer
prevention conference in about two months time in
Atlanta, here in the US.
You can see the major session themes there.
It looks very good, and I urge you to come if you're able to.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Trevor. That was beautiful.
Thank you.
So I have a question. It looks like the aneuploidy
burden clearly predicts progression, but the pattern seems pretty
similar in terms of the same chromosomes.
When you look at the plots, you see them in the non-progressors and the
progressors. So are you able or are you powered to do an analysis
and see which events occur later on during the evolution and
might actually be promoting the progression?
So kind of asking about the biology behind that.
Yeah, it's a really good observation.
So many of the events are the same in progressors and non-progressors.
And in fact, many of those chromosome losses and gains
that we see in colitis are actually the same as the ones you see in sporadic
colorectal cancer as well. So there is a high degree of overlap, but there are some
differences. So colitis copy number events, there are some distinct ones.
I can't remember what they all are off the top of my head, but between colitis and
sporadic and also in progressors versus non-progressors, there are
distinctive copy number events. The clearest one is loss of the whole of
chromosome 17 or 17q, actually,
not 17p.
Hi, Chris Reck. I'm a surgical pathologist, and I wonder, when do you make
the decision of colectomy?
We usually, when we see high-grade dysplasia, then the
clinician has the evidence to do a colectomy.
But based on your data, what is the cutoff?
When do you make the decision that colectomy is really necessary?
Yeah, it's an extremely good question, and I don't know the answer.
So
I would say two things. One is that we're planning a large-scale clinical
evaluation study, and through that study, we will
evaluate where the thresholds should be for making a
recommendation of colectomy. At the moment, of course, as you will
know, the clinical team together with the patient have to make a decision with
limited information. So we hope to be able to improve that decision making.
And then the second thing I'd like to say is that the decision to have a colectomy
is always the patient's. So some people will be more risk averse than others
or more worried about surgery than others, and so that decision is never going to
be anyone else's other than the patient's to make ultimately.
We just hope to provide better information to make a better decision.
Hi, Dr Graham. Fantastic talk. Thank you very much.
I was wondering if you could speak to the context of, or put your findings in the
context of the cocktail of drugs that these patients are often on,
with things like COX-2 inhibitors like mesalazine, some of the
biologics which inhibit β1 integrins and TNF
alpha, for example.
Do you see any treatment specific
responses to
tumor evolution in
the context of various drug treatments?
Yeah, I think that's an extremely important question as well, because I think where
you're going with it, I'm sure, is can we use those drugs for chemo
prevention of cancer.
And so one of the ideas we're interested in is to use copy number alteration,
which we know has this remarkable clonal evolution in the bowel and
pre-cancer.
We could use that as some kind of intermediate endpoint in a
clinical trial or some kind of study to evaluate
those chemo prevention by those multiple new drugs that are
now available for IBD patients. So I don't know the answer yet, but it's
something that's very much on our mind and I think is really important to
do. It would be great if we had a non-surgical way
to remove or reduce cancer risk.
Great talk. I was curious because you mentioned that some
samples show kind of common patterns in
CNAs. Have you looked into the predictive value of
specific loci or subsets of loci just beyond
universal aneuploidy levels?
Yeah, we have. So, in the original paper,
there is some events, apologies, I can't remember what they all are off the
top of my head, that are statistically enriched in progressors.
And adding those into the prediction model does slightly improve the
predictive value. So there are particular events associated with
progression.
So it's clear the inflamed bowel selects for some copy number
events or selects for clones which have aneuploidy,
but then cancer is a slightly different
evolutionary trajectory or possibly selective pressure that selects for
additional events on top of those, the background of the ones selected in the
inflamed bowel.
Thanks for a great talk. I may not have understood the burden metric, so I'm going
to ask a question that maybe you already answered.
Can you provide some estimates of the fraction of epithelial cells
outside of the pathologically annotated dysplastic regions that
are estimated to be aneuploid?
So what percentage of the bowel is covered by the aneuploid clones?
Specifically when you leave-- like, when you're looking in these margins, when
you're not in the dysplastic but where you see the aneuploidy.
Yeah. So yeah, that's a good question.
I don't know
exactly. So the sequencing is relatively sensitive, but not fully
sensitive, of course. So we can probably very confidently
detect down to, I don't know, 20% or something
of the biopsy being occupied by the
aneuploid clone and be extremely confident of finding
it.But then I guess your question would be, are the clones
much more widely disseminated at lower frequency?
So we have a bit of evidence of that.
So we've done some deep whole genome sequencing where you can call variants, and
we've also done some ultra-deep 10,000x
targeted sequencing for small panels.
Interestingly, in those data, we see, for instance, the P53
mutant clone that I showed you in that initial whole colon specimen.
In the ultra-deep data, we see biopsies which look
wild type for the aneuploidy. There's no detected copy number alteration.
But, say, 1 in 1,000 cells is P53
mutant. So it looks like some of these clones go
extremely
wide dissemination, but at low frequency around the whole bowel.
Thanks. There are two online questions.
One is, how does aneuploidy provide a selective advantage in the face of
inflammation?
Well, that is a good question.
I don't know.
There are many potential mechanisms.
So aneuploidy affects large parts of the genome.
So many genes and regulatory elements have changed dosage, and there
could be some complex phenotype resulting from that
that provides an advantage, but I don't know what it is.
An alternative hypothesis is that
aneuploidy is very stressful, and so to be able to survive the
stress of aneuploidy, cells have to be very robust and evolve some
robust phenotype. And possibly that robust phenotype is
what is selected for survival in the inflamed bowel rather than the
aneuploidy itself. I'd actually quite like to defer to Uri
Ben-David, who asked me the first question, because I know he has mechanistic
insights into that kind of thing, but, I don't know.
But there are different hypotheses there.
The other online question is, is normal tissue homeostasis modulating the
field effects you are seeing?
I guess I could interpret that question in many ways.
I think one way to interpret it is to
think about how the clones spread.
So in homeostasis, there is
mechanisms for growth to repair wounds in the bowel.
So the most common mechanism of growth is crypt fission, where these
crypts, these test tube-like structures that line the bowel epithelium,
they can divide, producing new crypts, so that heals a wound, if you have
fission in from the side of the wound.
So that's probably driving some of these clonal expansions, but I think it's
really unlikely that crypt fission, this homeostatic mechanism, drives
expansion around the whole bowel because you'd have to have so much fission, and
that's not going on. So I think, actually, my speculation is that there's
within colon metastasis, if you like, of these pre-cancerous
clones. I think they detach from the bowel, they float around, and they settle down
and start growing again. I think this shows you...
It's just an idea, really, but there is wild biology, I think, of pre-cancers to be
found.
Last question.
Hi. Thanks for the great talk. So I was wondering about the
mutations. So it seems that you have a separate high-depth data
where you are looking at mutations.
And
so it would be a great data set, like having hundreds of autopsy
samples from the same patient to look at the origins of cancers.
So what do you see in that? So, for example, you mentioned that
TP53 is not the first event that happens.
So do you have any insights on how cancer
originates from these hundreds of samples?
So no, we actually don't have very much
mutation resolution data. We've done lots of whole genome sequencing, but it's
typically low coverage. This is how we're able to do so many
samples without breaking the budget of the lab.
And so, no, I don't have a definitive answer about the SNV evolutionary
trajectories going on, but it's something on our minds very much.
I think with the new extremely error-corrected sequencing
methods like G-plex sequencing or NanoSeq,
it's now becoming possible to do extremely deep
sequencing on each of these samples and then be able to see mutations
that have multiplicity of
ones or tens of cells.
And with that kind of data, I think it will be possible to really dig into these
evolutionary trajectories, but we've not done that yet.
Thank you.
Great. Thanks. And I will
finish off
this session.
And I want to sort of pull back and give a more general
overview of the kinds of approaches people are thinking about and starting to take
in evolutionary addressing cancer.
Again, I have no financial relationships.
So, as I said at the introduction, cancers will evolve mechanisms of
resistance, and the kinds of mechanisms are quite
diverse. So we see mutations in the binding sites of drugs.
We see amplification or overexpression of the targeted drugs that dilutes out the
effect of the drugs. We see expression of ligands that
stimulate the pathway that the drug is trying to suppress
that outcompetes the binding of the drug to that target.
We see, of course, efflux pumps that can generate multi-drug resistance,
metabolic detoxification of the drugs.
Of course, bypass pathways can be upregulated to compensate for what the drugs
are doing.
Cancers also just inhibit apoptosis, so they don't
die when they otherwise would.And in the cases of
pro-drugs, you can get resistance through preventing the activation of the
pro-drug. And of course, cells can also survive by preventing the
drug uptake. And then another hard one, of course, is when cells become
quiescent or persist or cells that hang out in a spore-like state
for long periods of time and evade the drugs that way.
So there's a large diversity of ways that cancers can
evolve resistance. And the obvious thing to do when
you address therapeutic resistance across any system is just to combine
drugs under the hypothesis that if there are
different mechanisms of resistance to different drugs, then the chance that a cell
will be resistant to all the drugs in your cocktail should be lower.
This works well in HIV. It does not work in cancer.
And when I say it does not work, what I mean is you buy a few
months usually, typically, by going from one drug to multiple drugs, but you don't
cure the cancers usually.
I also want to point out this problem of resistance is also a problem for immune
checkpoint blockade therapies. So there's justified excitement in the number of
people we've been able to
cure and also just prolong life using these immune checkpoint blockade
therapies. But even in those people that respond,
about half of them will progress in melanoma and about
65% will progress in non-small cell lung cancer.
And the one way to think about this is that there are a diversity of mechanisms of
resistance to immunotherapies. So, of course, our drugs typically target the PD-1
and PD-L1 pathway, also the CTLA-4, but those aren't
the only ways that cancers evolve to evade the immune system.
So by selecting against those first two mechanisms of
evasion, you can select for the other ones.
So down-regulating MHC, recruiting T regulatory cells.
You could also just get selection to remove the clones that have the
neoantigens, leaving behind clones that are non-antigenic.
The cancer sometimes dysregulate immune responses.
They can cause aberrant differentiation of
dendritic cells.
Again, they can
deregulate their apoptotic pathways, and there are other forms of
modifications to the microenvironment like acidification that can make it more
immune and suppressive.
So we should expect, and we do see resistance to all of the kinds of
interventions we have for cancer.
So again, the real question here is, given how evolvable cancers are,
how should we, how can we manage an evolving disease?
And this is a problem not just for cancer, but it's a problem for infectious
diseases, viral disease,
antibiotics, anti-malarias, pests in agriculture, and
weed herbicides. And so what we've done is tried to look
across all these different fields and asked how are people dealing with
these evolving systems, including cancer.
And I think the strategies fall into these two categories of reducing the
evolvability, which you may want to combine with some other approach
or other therapy, as well as changing what is selected.
So I'm going to go through some of these ideas.
So if you think about the evolvability of cancer, it really depends on five
parameters of the rate of cancer. There's the mutation rate, and of course, there's
different kinds of mutations,
point mutations, copy number alterations that Trevor was just talking about,
methylation, so epigenetic evolution, structural variants, these
different mechanisms of mutation rates.
Population size also determines the evolutionary rate, and here we're talking about
really the stem cell population or self-renewing cell population within the
cancers, the generation time of those self-renewing cells, the
heritability of the phenotype, so that's the correlation between the phenotype and
the genotype of the cells, and the strengths of selection.
And the graphs I'm showing you here actually is all Trevor's work and his
collaborators showing that you can actually measure these different
parameters of evolution. So we have a way of measuring it, which means we can also
develop drugs and test how they're affecting these parameters.
One thing we've done is use phylogenetic methods to measure mutation rate
in vivo. That's the graph on the right from our earlier work on
copy number alterations in Barrett's Esophagus, showing that use of NSAIDs
dropped the mutation rate by orders of magnitude when patients went on the
NSAIDs. There's great work by Susan Rosenberg looking
at modulating mutation rates, mostly in E.
coli, but also in genes that have homologs in human
cells, showing that there's a variety of drugs that actually can reduce the
mutation rate, either by avoiding the stress response that would otherwise raise
mutation rates or modifying, for
instance, which polymerases are being used, what kind of error correction
machinery is being used. So it may seem
surprising, but we do have mechanisms for reducing mutation rate
in these evolving systems.
If you want to reduce the population size and slow the generation
time, I'm particularly interested in targeting what are the limiting resources, and
we haven't done as much research in cancer as I think we should to
understand what are the limiting resources.
And clearly, this changes over time within a patient.
So we certainly have evidence that oxygen is sometimes a limiting resource when
areas of hypoxia and necrosis, but after angiogenesis, that maybe goes
away. We don't know whether glucose or phosphorus or any of the other
necessary amino acids are limiting at any given time.
The graph on the right is actually from malaria, showing that when they limited
resources for the malarial parasites in vitro, they could
prevent the emergence of resistant strains.
In fact, in this case, limiting resources not only reduced the population
size and
slowed the generation time, but actually the resistant cells are more
dependent on the limiting resources than the sensitive cells, so it particularly
increased the competition and reduced the fitness of the resistant clones.
So I think there's a lot more work to be done there.
Another way we could go about dealing with evolvability is just to reduce the
strength of selection. And what's striking to me is that if
you wanted to evolve resistance, if that was
your... strange goal. The way to get
resistance as fast as possible is to use the maximum tolerated dose.
So that's the actual standard of care in most cancers, is
the way that we would choose to select for the resistance as fast
as possible. I'm influenced by this work in non-small cell lung
cancer, which was designed to look at quality of life.
If people with metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer were given early palliative care instead of the maximum tolerated
dose, they indeed were able to increase the quality of life by reducing
toxicity, but surprisingly, they also dramatically increased
the survival time. And the intuition here is that the lower dose you
use, the less you select for resistance, and in
incurable cancers, that should correlate with survival time
as well as quality of life.
So again, just take the step back. If we
can
try to reduce the evolvability and thus increase the
time to death or resistance, but
also we can ask, how can we change what is selected for?
So I've argued that maximum tolerated dose essentially selects for resistance.
But the real question for all of us, at least if we think about this from an
evolutionary point of view, we're going to intervene on the tumor.
We're going to select for something. What is it that we would like to select for?
And I offer that as a general question for the future.
But here are some of the answers. So some of the obvious things to do is to look at
the mechanisms of resistance to a given drug and try to intervene on that
mechanism. So people have developed second and third-line
drugs for EGFR-targeted therapies that can handle the forms of resistance
that first show up.
The pest managers have argued that we should be using very
different forms of selective pressures, so looking at the pathogens and the
predators for our evolving population, as well as drugs that have very
diverse mechanisms of action, with the intuition that resistance is going to
require very different kinds of mechanisms.
And so,
resistance to one drug or one intervention will not generalize to
get cross-resistance to our other interventions.
We can also rotate the selective pressures or rotating drugs,
even before resistance expands. In some sense, what we do in the clinic
often is we use a therapy until the tumor progresses, and then we
switch therapy. But by the time the tumor progresses, it has regenerated a great
deal of diversity. And one of the observations in the clinic that I think we still
don't fully understand is that second and third-line therapies don't work for
nearly as long as first-line therapies.
That is, when the tumor comes back, it's more evolvable and more aggressive.
Another approach to selection would be to alternate between opposing
selective pressures.
So there's been experiments using
estrogen
suppression or SERMs, so selective estrogen
receptor-targeted therapies, alternating with high-dose estrogen,
which is also therapy for ER-positive breast cancer.
So you're applying very different selective pressures, in fact, opposing selective
pressures. If you sort of ping-pong back and forth between them, you may be able to
keep the tumor under control for very long periods of time.
A related idea is called negative cross resistance in the malaria field, or what
Bob Gatenby calls double bind therapy, where you apply drugs that
select for opposite forms of resistance that are incompatible with each other.
Another approach is if you understand the mechanisms of resistance that are
typical, you can try to select against resistance before you come in
with the drug that selects for that resistance.
So you sucker the tumor into a vulnerable state by removing the resistant clones
initially, and then you hit it with your traditional therapy, which we
call the sucker's gambit.
You could also potentially select for addiction to a controllable factor and then
remove that factor.
And in fact, if you just add additional selective pressures, they could be
completely benign, you can slow down evolution.
And this graph on the right is some work where we did a long-term yeast experiment
where we applied either one or three different selective pressures to the
yeast. And under the strains that were selected on all three pressures, the
populations did not evolve as much to any single pressure.
And that's because clones that are responding to one pressure actually compete with
clones responding to other pressures and slow down response to any given pressure.
So just by adding benign pressures to evolving population of
neoplastic cells, you could potentially slow down progression and response
to your chemotherapies.
So this is work that Sara Saeedi led,
she's actually in the audience,
to look at the ideas coming out of integrated pest management.
So I argue that the pest managers are about 40 years ahead of us
oncologists, and that's because back in the '80s, they realized
that multi-pesticides were just selecting for multi-drug
resistance, and they started innovating.
And so they've developed a series of heuristics and methods that actually form a
cycle called integrated pest management.
And what Sara and we did was think about how that can be
translated to cancer biology. And so,
for example, they use prevention and suppression initially.
They have a guided
process of decision-making where they won't even apply a pesticide if the pest
infection is below
tolerable levels. So they just avoid putting selective pressure in the first
place if they can.
They also monitor much more frequently than we do.
They will put out traps in their fields and check what pests are in their fields
every day, as opposed to doing a CT scan every
two to three months.
As I mentioned, they have this approach of reducing
cross-resistance by using very different modes of action, including biological
controls, like pathogens and predators.
They try to use pesticides with the least side effects, the most narrow drugs
possible, without cumulative toxicity.
And their recommendation is not to use the maximum tolerated dose,
but to use the minimum effective dose.
And I should point out that pest managers have a similar problem of toxicity in
terms of effects on the environment and
other-both plants and animals in the environment and
wanting to avoid getting the pesticides into the food system.
They prefer to use non-chemical controls when they can, so changing the
habitat, mechanically removing pests,
and biological controls that I've mentioned, and they constantly evaluate how their
therapies are working and change as soon as they see that they're not working.
And again, I think this is something that we're not doing very well in oncology.
It takes us a long time before
we change what we're doing. Furthermore, they do a lot of forecasting.
That is modeling of what they expect to see given any potential intervention
and choosing those that their models suggest are going to be most effective.
And I know that Sandy Anderson and Bob Gatenby at the Moffitt Cancer Center are
strong proponents of this kind of forecasting-based
therapy.
So in fact, this idea of adaptive therapy was derived from pest management.
It actually came from Bob Gatenby, who really doesn't
like cabbage, and he saw some work in pest management of
some pests that were destroying the cabbage crops and was
inspired by that to try it in cancer.
And the ideas from integrated pest management here are really to, first of all,
assume that resistance is already present in the fields.
And the parallel here is to assume that there's resistant clones in a Stage IV
cancer before we start therapy,
which implies that cure is not possible.
So they treat with intent to control, not with intent to
eradicate, and they only treat when necessary, and again, they use the minimum
effective dose. So the way I think about this is that
therapy can suppress sensitive cells.
Sensitive cells can suppress resistant cells through competition
under the assumption that resistance has some fitness cost.
So what we typically do with high-dose therapy is we go in with a maximum
tolerated dose. We kill all the sensitive cells, and there's nothing left to
compete with the resistant cells. They grow out and kill our patients.
And the idea behind adaptive therapy is really to set up a negative feedback loop
such that you don't kill too many sensitive cells and preserve them to
compete with the resistant cells.
So this is really the enemy of my enemy is my friend.
The real enemy here is resistant cells. Their enemy is the sensitive cells.
They're actually our friends in this case.
This graph here is from Trevor Graham and Michelle Lockley,
developing in a mouse model for ovarian cancer.
This is the first ovarian cancer adaptive therapy work from Bob Gatenby back in
2009, and then follow-up work from Bob in
triple-negative breast cancer. This is a form of adaptive therapy called dose
modulation. So the idea here is that if the tumor grows, you raise the
dose, but if the tumor is shrinking, you lower the dose.
You back off.
And I know that is very counterintuitive.
So if the tumor shrinks, both patients and oncologists celebrate.
It's working. And then the intuition is to keep going, but the
problem is if you keep going, you kill all the sensitive cells, and there's nothing
left to compete with resistant cells.
So this
algorithm or this protocol basically is trying to find a dose that keeps the tumor
stable. So if the dose has kept the tumor stable, you just keep
doing that dose. Again, if it shrinks, you reduce, and if it grows, you raise the
dose.
One surprise from these mouse model experiments was the dose necessary to
control the tumor actually decreased over time.
That was a surprise to everybody.
Part of that seems to be because under the adaptive therapy arms, the
vasculature becomes normalized.
You don't see the areas of hypoxia and necrosis, and so we think part of the
effect here is that the drugs are being more efficiently delivered to the tumors
over time.
There's only been one clinical trial that's reported out for adaptive therapy.
It was from Bob Gatenby and colleagues at the Moffitt Cancer Center.
It was in metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer. They used a slightly different protocol for
adaptive therapy. It didn't modulate the dose.
They just tracked the PSA levels, and if the
tumor burden ever fell below 50% of its initial value, they stopped dosing and went
on drug holiday, and then they started again if the tumor came back to its initial
value. What you see, every row here is one patient.
This is a small clinical trial. The red is when the patient was on
abiraterone. The black is when they were on drug holiday.
And you can see that the different patients, the different tumors had very
different kinetics. Some tumors shrank quickly but then
grew back quickly. Others took a long time to shrink and took a long time to grow
back.
They compared it to a contemporaneous cohort that had the same inclusion criteria.
This was not a randomized trial.
And in that comparison, they were able to double time to progression, or
more than double time to progression
from
14.3 months to 33.5 months. They also almost doubled the overall
survival time.
When they fit their data to a simple ODE
competition model,
they found that
they were getting about a sevenfold cost of resistance, and that's
why the competition was working. Their model also suggested that they had
waited too long before they went on drug holiday.
They waited for radiographic confirmation rather than just using PSA.
So they think they could actually do better.
I'm happy to report that there's a new adaptive therapy trial that's opened at the
Mayo Clinic that I'm involved in. Dr. Lita Mina is the PI.
This is for women that have ER-positive metastatic breast cancer that's
become endocrine resistant and are about to start chemotherapy.
So we're using capecitabine in that trial.
So I want to sort of again take a step back and
point out that there's really a mismatch between how we dose cancer and our
intent. Now, our Phase I trials look for the maximum tolerated
dose under the assumption that that's optimal, that we're getting the biggest
response is the best thing to do. That may be true when you can cure a
cancer, but when you can't cure a cancer, which is typical
for most Stage IV solid tumors, then the
bigger effect you have means that you're selecting for resistance as fast as
possible. In other words, tumor response is not a good surrogate
biomarker for overall
survival.So I think the future of oncology is going to
involve monitoring the tumor response and
changing what we're doing when we see the tumor is evolving resistance to whatever
we're doing. I think it will also involve treating with intent to control in the
metastatic setting, which may involve
both reducing evolvability and changing what we're selecting for,
specifically reducing selection for resistance.
I think we also need to do a lot better in terms of predictive modeling.
So that's like Wayne Gretzky's idea of skating to where the puck is going to be,
not where it is at the moment,
and using interventions that are aimed at selecting for a desired phenotype,
whatever that phenotype may be. So I'm very excited about this because we
now have a set of evolutionary approaches to cancer that are applicable to any
drug, that are applicable to any cancer.
All we need to do is the clinical trial to test if these evolutionary
therapies can do better than our standard of care.
So finally, I want to acknowledge the great,
generous grant support we've had, including the ARPA-H ADAPT grant that Trey
mentioned earlier on, and the collaborators.
I've highlighted the ones that have been most closely involved
in driving the work that I've discussed today. Thank you very much.
Questions?
Yes. I think it's very interesting, the adaptive therapy.
And obviously some of the tumor types you showed, triple-negative
breast cancer and hormone-refractory breast cancer,
ovarian cancer, are the ones that are very sensitive to chemotherapy.
But obviously, as everyone in the room knows, we're using much less chemotherapy
now, much more targeted treatments and immunotherapy.
So it's hard for me to see how the adaptive approach is really going to
work in the immunotherapy era, which is coming ahead.
Could you comment on that a little bit?
Sure. It's a good point. So adaptive therapy only works if you're
getting some response. So in something like pancreatic cancer, where we have very
few drugs that have any response, it's going to be harder.
I think it should work very well in targeted therapies where we typically get a
response, but we also get resistance very quickly.
Since this is a strategy for dealing with the resistance, I'm quite optimistic
about targeted therapy. Now, immunotherapy, I think, is a particularly hard one
because it's not clear to me how well we can dial up and down the
response of the immune system with our drug.
I think that's an open question, and I'm not
sure it's going to work at all. We'll have to test that.
Thank you.
Great talk.
So my question is regarding, you mentioned that
we sort of should assume that a lot of the resistance is
already there.
Yes.
And one thing that I've found, so I study non-small cell lung cancer
and using rapid autopsy, and what we found is that it's not even
just one resistance. Sometimes it's like three or four more-
Yeah
... that are lesion specific.
Yeah.
And how do you think we can
include this where we don't have autopsy, we can't wait for a patient
to pass away to study these sort of things.
How do we model that or we include these
multi-resistance that could be preexisting, that we can detect
into this new treatment strategies you mentioned?
Yeah, it's a good point. I think given the evolvability of most cancers, it's
actually quite likely that multiple resistant clones, and as you point out, that
this has been observed in a number of cancers now.
Multiple resistant clones may be present in any given patient at any given time.
One nice thing about the current way that we're doing adaptive therapy is that all
you need is a measure of tumor burden.
We don't actually specifically have to have an assay for the amount of
resistance. Although, I'm hopeful that cell-free DNA and others will give
us some insight into that, and we can refine these approaches.
So luckily, I don't think we have to.
I think one of the caveats here is that if some metastases are growing and other
metastases are shrinking, it's not clear what to do.
Our first attempt to deal with that is just to
imagine that we don't know the heterogeneity, and we just, again,
measure by total tumor burden. So summing up all the metastases together and
managing based on that. But
with radiation, we may be able to target specific locations differently than
others. And so maybe there's some more sophisticated things we could do.
It's a good question. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I mean, the adaptive therapy
is one entity that's being applied to multiple different scenarios,
some of which may well respond in the way that you've shown.
In others, though, it's quite possible that the resistant clone does not
have some sort of metabolic cost-
Yes
... in the sense that your ones do.
Yes.
And there have been other studies, such as ones in
cetuximab, where when you develop RAS mutation,
you
intermittently use cetuximab, have not shown benefit.
So I'm just concerned that adaptive therapy as one entity
covering a multitude of different scenarios.
Yes. Thanks.
I agree, and I want to make two points relative to that.
One is there is an important difference between intermittent therapies and
adaptive therapies. Most intermittent therapies that have been tested have followed
a fixed schedule, regardless of what is happening in the patient.
And so you don't really get the personalized effect that
the adaptive therapy gives you.
We've recently done a systematic review of all of the experiments we could find
where the people competed a sensitive clone versus a resistant clone
to address that question of does resistance really
have a fitness cost? We were able to find
49 experiments that had done that competition.
Only two-thirds of them found a cost of resistance.
So we can't assume it's going to be there, and so adaptive therapy will
fail if resistance does not come with a fitness cost, which suggests that
we should be developing some assays to measure whether or not resistance has a cost
in a given patient. So yes, it's not a panacea that's going to work in all cases,
certainly. Thanks. Laura?
I have another question. I was thinking the
examples you showed were mostly of resistance of patients
who started off with metastatic disease.
Yes.
And so I'm not sure whether... the progression that you
saw were actually other metastatic lesions that sort of started to
grow or the same one that colonized again.
You may also not know.
But
those other metastases, if they are the ones that start growing,
are of course a clone, might be clonally different from the primary
tumor,
but they may have nothing to do with the resistance of the
metastatic lesion you were treating.
So I was wondering what you think. I work mostly in primary
disease in clinical trials where we try
to prevent a metastatic lesion. And so we look at the
initial tumor response, and immune therapy in breast cancer can
be very effective. Yet, there are patients who do not
respond in that initial therapy, and these are
the ones that have metastatic lesions, some of them.
And so that's a different clonal evolution maybe.
What is your thought about that?
Yeah.
So the therapies we're using are not targeted to a particular
mechanism resistance. So in some sense it doesn't matter,
it shouldn't matter if there's different mechanisms in a met versus
the primary, as long as there's still some cost to that resistance.
That being said, one of the open questions has been,
in metastatic disease where it's really spread throughout the body, is there enough
competition such that the sensitive cells can really drive down the resistant
cells? Or once you're metastatic, is it
everything growing exponentially? So it's an open question.
We only have this one clinical trial in metastatic cases where it worked, so
it suggests that it can work. How often it's going to work, how hard that's going
to be is an open question. I should
be clear here that we have a lot of ideas, and this is
a very young field, so one clinical trial on the order of
five or six mouse experiment papers that have been published.
It's a small literature. It's a lot of, I think, exciting possibilities.
It's got good theoretical basis. There's a lot more theoretical modeling, but we
really have to test these, and this is a call to arms for us to test these
approaches.
We at one point tried to get funding actually to do these experiments of
adaptive-
Yes, that is our main challenge
... primary disease after the first, but so far we didn't get it funded, but we'll
try again.
Yep. You and me, sister. Yeah.
Thank you for the great talk. Yeah, my question was exactly related to what you
just said. These are such interesting ideas, and there's
so much awareness now about too much therapy and the side effects
of different therapies.
Why is there so little literature and clinical trials related
to these ideas?
Well,
as you probably know, cancer biology has not been very evolutionary.
There aren't very many evolutionary biologists in our field.
And so I think there's, in general,
a issue of education about what are the tools from
evolution and ideas from evolution that we can apply to therapy, and my whole
career has been trying to help do that, bring those tools to
cancer biology.
Some of this is counterintuitive, and I think there is a psychological issue of
switching from intent to cure to intent to control.
I think that's hard for a lot of us to give up on the idea of a cure.
I think the problem is that we have really had blinders on and so focused on
cure that we have not explored all the alternatives,
where the real
goal is not to cure. The real goal is to keep people alive and have a good quality
of life. And cure is one way of doing that, but we've been banging
our heads against that for 70 years, and I think it's time that we explore these
alternatives.
Great. Thank you.